Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today
we are going to be talking
about the Iran-Contra Affair.
It’s the American scandal involving
Ronald Reagan, missiles, revolutions,
rebels, hostages, dodgy arms dealers,
the US Constitution, covert operations,
Swiss bank accounts, and the seemingly
unrelated countries of Nicaragua and Iran.
It’s a particularly long and complicated
one, but it is fascinating, so let’s not
waste a minute and get right into it.
If you are the sort of person
who yearns for power, you can’t
do much better than becoming the
president of the United States.
You are essentially the chief
executive of the world’s richest
and most powerful country.
You can do what you want.
Of course, you can’t
do everything you want.
The US Constitution has a rigid
set of checks and balances, in
the form of the other branches of
government: Congress and the Judiciary.
Pretty much every president in American
history has found themselves blocked in
some way by the laws and wishes of these
other branches, some more than others.
Ronald Reagan was no exception.
He had been elected in a landslide victory
in 1980, partly due to the unpopularity
of his opponent, the sitting President
Jimmy Carter, and partly on a platform
to bring back conservative values.
And one of Reagan’s big personal
beliefs was in the danger of
communism, not just in the United
States, but all over the world.
A big part of this was the concept
known as “domino theory”, the idea that
if one country fell to communism, it
would spread like a virus, infecting
all the neighbouring countries
before continuing all over the world.
And Reagan, despite plenty of evidence
to suggest that communism wasn’t as viral
as its greatest critics suggested, well,
he wasn’t prepared to take any chances.
His staunch belief was that communism was
one of the great dangers facing the world,
and he was prepared to do whatever it
took to stop it, especially if it showed
signs of approaching the American border.
And this was hardly a Reagan invention;
the CIA had spent decades secretly
financing groups opposed to communism,
everywhere from Latin America to Africa.
One of the groups the US had been
financing was called the Contras.
It was a right-wing guerrilla group
fighting against the communists
that had come to power in Nicaragua
after the Sandinista Revolution.
Now, Nicaragua isn’t particularly
close to the United States; you have
Honduras, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Belize and Mexico which act as a buffer.
But it was still too close to home.
So the CIA provided financial and
military support to this group that
would stir up trouble in Nicaragua,
doing everything it could to
disrupt the left-wing Sandinistas.
Now, we’ll press pause on the Contras,
as we now need to move right over to the
other side of the geopolitical chessboard
to a region in which the United States
had other interests, interests that
seemed to be completely unrelated to
Nicaragua, but would turn out to be
more related than initially thought.
In 1979, the Iranian Revolution
led to the overthrow of the Shah of
Iran and the swift transition from a
Western-leaning monarchy to an Islamic
Republic hostile to Western influence.
Later that year, a group of
students stormed the US embassy
and took 66 Americans hostage.
This would come to be known as the Iran
Hostage Crisis, and would last from
November 1979 to January 1981, with the
last hostages being released on the day of
Ronald Reagan’s inauguration as president.
As a result of the hostage crisis and
of the Republic of Iran’s stated aim
of spreading Islamic fundamentalism
through the Middle East, the United
States cut off all ties with the
country, even going so far as to declare
it a “state sponsor of terrorism”.
This was a perfectly reasonable
assessment; Iran was and still
is the largest sponsor of
terrorist groups in the region.
But there were several problems
with the United States breaking
off all contact with the country,
both for Iran and for the US.
For Iran, it meant cutting off a
vital source of military equipment.
Under the Shah, Iran had been
one of America’s best customers.
Billions of dollars’ worth of
U.S. jets, tanks, and missiles
had been shipped to Iran.
When relations broke, Iran was left with
a shiny arsenal it couldn’t maintain.
This was a problem, and an even greater
one after September of 1980, when
Saddam Hussein decided to invade Iran.
For the United States, on the other
hand, the loss of a former key
ally could mean further instability
in an already volatile region.
And in fact, selling Iran the
weapons it needed to fight off
the Iraqi threat was no bad thing.
A little war between Iran and
Iraq actually served American
interests quite nicely.
The US didn’t want either side to
emerge completely victorious, and the
best possible scenario was a drawn-out
conflict that left both parties weaker.
And there was a third
interested party: Israel.
Israel had similar goals to the US when
it came to supplying Iran with weapons:
keep Iran and Iraq busy fighting amongst
themselves, so that both emerge weaker.
Now, I appreciate that things are
getting complicated, but let me add
one more country to the mix: Lebanon.
Lebanon in the 1980s
was in a state of chaos.
The country had been torn apart by civil
war, and in the middle of it, groups
backed by Iran, including Hezbollah, had
begun kidnapping Americans in Beirut.
Journalists, teachers, and diplomats
were taken and held for years.
Even the CIA station chief,
William Buckley, was taken.
Their captors demanded the
release of Hezbollah operatives
being held in Israeli jails.
This wasn’t going to happen; Ronald
Reagan had built his reputation on
never negotiating with terrorists, and
it would be a huge public humiliation
to go back on this, especially with
the memory of the Iran Hostage Crisis
still fresh in everyone’s minds.
But, he did want the American
hostages home safe, and it would
certainly be convenient if there
were some way of making this happen.
And so, by the mid-1980s,
the stage was set.
On the one side,
Nicaragua and the Contras.
On the other, Iran, desperate for
weapons, officially America’s sworn enemy,
but also the only country with enough
influence on Hezbollah to help secure the
release of American hostages in Lebanon.
And in the middle, Israel.
Now, it’s important to stress that, even
though we now talk of the “Iran-Contra
Scandal”, the Iranians had nothing to
do with the Contras, at least directly.
And there wouldn’t have been
any “scandal” were it not for
Congress getting in the way.
Bringing it back to the three branches of
government we talked about at the start,
starting in 1982, Congress passed a series
of laws that would come to be known as
the Boland Amendments, which prohibited
United States intelligence agencies
from providing funding for the Contras.
Now, there was a series of amendments
because each one went slightly further
in terms of what was prohibited; we
won’t go into the details of each
one, but the important thing was
that the clear intention was to stop
U.S. involvement in Nicaragua’s war.
There were several reasons for
this, from the documented human
rights abuses committed by the
Contras through to a general public
weariness of US involvement in the
domestic affairs of other countries.
And on paper, that was the end of it.
The United States was now legally
forbidden from funding the Contras.
Now, to understand the next chapter
of this story, we need to understand
a bit more about the power dynamics
within the Reagan administration.
Ronald Reagan was very
much a “big picture” man.
He had strong convictions — fight
communism, support freedom fighters,
stand tall against America’s enemies
— but he wasn’t a details person.
He liked to set the general direction,
then let his advisers work out the
details of how to actually implement it.
He would be brought memos to read
or documents to sign off on, but
he wouldn’t always read them,
even before adding his signature.
Remember this, as it’ll
be important later on.
What this meant was that his
administration was filled with
people who understood their role
as interpreting what Reagan wanted
and translating it into action.
As long as they were executing
his broad wishes, they had the
green light to get creative.
The first “creative” project was to do
with getting the US hostages back, and
this conveniently tied in with the problem
of how to continue supplying the Iranians
with weapons, despite Iran having become
a sworn enemy of the United States.
How it went was something like this.
The Americans were approached by an
Iranian named Manucher Ghorbanifar.
He was a shady individual, a “devious
character” according to Ronald Reagan and
"one of the most despicable characters
I have ever met", according to Robert
MacFarlane, a National Security Advisor
who we’ll meet again in a few minutes.
He was a dodgy fellow, but he claimed to
have influence within the Iranian regime.
He told the Americans that if they
supplied Iran with missiles, Iran
would put pressure on Hezbollah to
release the hostages held in Lebanon.
Ghorbanifar wasn’t doing this out
of the goodness of his own heart,
of course; he stood to collect a
healthy commission on the sale.
The trade would all be facilitated
through Israel, so the US would
transfer the weapons to Israel, which
would then secretly send them to Iran.
In practice, Israel supplied some
missiles from its own stocks, with
U.S. approval, and would later be
replenished by the United States.
The Iranians would pay the agreed price,
and the hostages would be released.
It all went to plan, apart from
the small detail that not all
the hostages were released.
In fact, what happened
was almost the opposite.
Yes, the Iranians got their missiles.
Yes, Ghorbanifar pocketed his commission.
But instead of releasing all the
American hostages, Hezbollah freed one
and then promptly kidnapped another.
It became a grim game of hostage
musical chairs: one out, one in.
Now, this was all very much done behind
closed doors; it wasn’t public knowledge.
And there was debate within the
White House about what to do next.
Ghorbanifar said that the Iranians needed
more missiles, and they would make sure
the hostages were released if they were
only sent a new batch, but this time
of more sophisticated HAWK missiles.
Despite the obvious reservations
about Ghorbanifar’s trustworthiness,
his clear financial incentive to
broker as many deals as possible,
and his claims to have influence,
which may have been exaggerated,
the Americans decided to go ahead.
They had opened the door to Iran,
and there were people inside the
Reagan administration who thought
that, despite the obvious risks,
this was still worth pursuing.
Robert McFarlane, the National
Security Adviser, and his successor
John Poindexter, they believed that
engaging Iran could be part of a
longer-term strategy, not just to
free hostages, but to build bridges
with so-called “moderates” inside
the Iranian regime, moderates
that Ghorbanifar promised existed.
But, again, the same thing happened.
Iran got its weapons, Ghorbanifar
got his fat commission for brokering
the detail, and all but one of
the hostages remained in Lebanon.
In fact, there is another character
in this story you might remember
from another episode: the Saudi
arms dealer, Adnan Khashoggi.
He was a key associate of
Ghorbanifar and provided connections
and financing for the deals.
If you’d like to hear more about
his fascinating and very dodgy life,
episode number 466 is the one for you.
Now, the man on the American side
tasked with running the day-to-day
details of this operation was a Marine
lieutenant colonel called Oliver North.
North worked in the National Security
Council staff, the NSC, and he
was the sort of officer who prided
himself on “getting things done.”
One of the things he was tasked with was
finding creative ways to get around the
Boland Amendment, the legal amendment
prohibiting the US from providing
federal funding for the Contras.
One thing he did was make it clear to
American allies that if they provided
funding for the Contras, this could get
them favourable treatment from the US.
And several countries were perfectly
willing to donate, giving money
to the Contras, essentially on
behalf of the United States.
There was $32 million from Saudi Arabia.
The Sultan of Brunei, on the other
hand, transferred $10 million to a
Swiss bank account, which was intended
to be transferred to the Contras.
Funnily enough, North made a mistake
with the account number, and it
was transferred to a 60-year-old
Swiss businessman instead.
And perhaps even more bizarrely, the
man who received this $10 million
transfer from the Sultan of Brunei didn’t
question it, but instead transferred
the money to a different account,
and would later say he didn’t think
anything of this large transfer, as
he was expecting a big deposit anyway.
He wasn’t prosecuted for this, so
I guess the lesson there is that if
you accidentally receive $10 million
into your bank account from the
Sultan of Brunei, just say you were
expecting it and it’ll all be ok.
Now, North might have had a mix-up with
the Sultan of Brunei, but he was pretty
efficient when it came to everything else.
One of his responsibilities
was moving the money around
from the Iranian weapons sales.
And some time around 1985, it’s thought,
he noticed something interesting:
there was $850,000 sitting in a
Swiss bank account, profit left
over from the weapons sales to Iran.
It turned out that Ghorbanifar, true
to Reagan’s assessment of being a
“devious character”, had been massively
overcharging the Iranians for the
weapons, charging them 600% more.
This had meant a much bigger commission
for Ghorbanifar, but it also meant
that with each trade, the US government
would make a significant profit.
What if this money could
be diverted to the Contras?
It was all “off the books” anyway, and it
seemed to provide a neat solution: Iran
got its weapons, which could, Ghorbanifar
promised, lead to the return of the
hostages, the surplus from this would
go towards the funding of the Contras,
and this wasn’t technically in violation
of the Boland Amendment, because the
NSC staff, as an advisory body in the
Executive Office, wasn’t explicitly
named like the CIA or the Pentagon.
It existed in this legal grey
area, this legal loophole.
The world was a geopolitical
puzzle, and this was how to
solve it: neatly and tidily.
So, once the principle was established
— that money from Iranian arms sales
could be siphoned off to fund the
Contras — the operation began to grow.
More shipments, more
money, more intermediaries.
An estimated $3.5 million diverted.
Swiss bank accounts multiplied, more shady
middlemen were brought in, and soon there
was a parallel foreign policy running
out of the basement of the White House.
It was complex, it was secret, and it was
completely outside the reach of Congress.
It also didn’t really work.
The more Americans dealt with
Ghorbanifar and his Iranian contacts,
the more obvious it became that
this was a disaster in the making.
Hostages weren’t really being freed.
New ones were being taken.
The Iranians, via Ghorbanifor,
kept asking for more weapons,
always promising that the next
deal would be the last one needed.
And inside the White House,
not everyone even agreed on
what the point of it all was.
Was this about hostages?
About opening a channel to Iran?
Or just about keeping the Contras alive?
The confusion was only just beginning.
And what about Reagan himself?
To this day, historians debate
exactly how much he knew.
He was briefed in vague terms,
he nodded at memos, he signed
off on broad directions.
But he never seemed to
focus on the details.
This gave his advisers room
to run, and run they did.
Later, when the whole affair came
to light, Reagan would insist he
hadn’t authorised arms for hostages.
But even so, even if you believe this
statement and that he wasn’t leaning
on his previous career as a Hollywood
actor, it’s clear that his style of
leadership — big on vision, light on
detail — this was what allowed this
all to happen in the first place.
So, what happened next?
Well, it might have all been kept
under wraps, never revealed to
the public, had it not been for an
American aeroplane getting shot down
over Nicaragua in October of 1986.
The plane was carrying “60 AK-47
rifles, 50,000 AK-47 bullets, several
dozen grenade launchers and 150 pairs
of jungle boots", not exactly hand
luggage for a romantic weekend away.
All but one of the crew were killed.
The sole survivor was a man named
Eugene Hasenfus, who jumped out of
the plane and activated his parachute.
He was captured with flight logs,
phone numbers, and documents that
pointed to an extensive operation.
He was questioned, and there was
a press conference in which he
stated that these flights into
Nicaragua were the work of the CIA.
Washington denied it, of course, but
the crash blew open the Contra side of
the story: the US government, in direct
violation of the Boland Amendments,
was still interfering in Nicaragua.
And then, less than a month
later, the other shoe dropped,
this time from the Middle East.
On 3 November 1986, a Lebanese newspaper
published a scoop: the United States
had secretly shipped missiles to Iran.
The details were startling: anti-tank
and anti-aircraft missiles, routed
through third countries, all supposedly
to win influence with “moderates” and
help free hostages in Lebanon, influence
that had no signs of being won, and
hostages that were not released.
Importantly, the two stories
weren’t initially connected; they
were two different scandals, and
were both addressed separately.
But from that point on,
events moved quickly.
On 13 November, Ronald
Reagan addressed the nation.
He insisted it hadn’t been
“arms for hostages.” He spoke of
reaching out to Iranian moderates.
But the press and Congress smelled blood.
And behind the scenes, there was panic.
An internal investigation was launched.
In the NSC offices, as
investigators approached, Oliver
North and his secretary shredded
incriminating documents and memos.
Notes were pulled, files disappeared.
Unfortunately for them, and fortunately
for justice and my ability to tell
this story, some paperwork survived.
There was an internal review led by the
Attorney General, and his team found
what no one had admitted in public:
profits from the Iran missile sales
had been diverted to the Contras.
In that instant, two separate scandals
snapped together into one: Iran–Contra.
The cover was gone.
Congressional hearings followed in
1987; Oliver North, with his crisp
uniform, tidy hair, and unflinching tone,
became the public face of the scandal.
Appearing in his Marine uniform, Lt.
Col. North defiantly defended his
actions, portraying them as patriotic.
An estimated 55 million Americans
watched his first day of testimony, and
“Olliemania” broke out across the country.
Shirts and bumper stickers were sold,
supportive prayer vigils were held,
and hundreds of thousands of dollars
were collected for his legal fees.
The jury found North guilty on
3 of the 12 counts against him.
He was sentenced to a three-year suspended
prison term, two years probation,
$150,000 in fines, and 1,200 hours of
community service, convictions that
were all overturned the following year.
In terms of the others implicated,
John Poindexter resigned.
His predecessor, Robert McFarlane,
was pulled back in for questioning.
The independent counsel opened
years of investigations.
There were more convictions, but
some were overturned on appeal.
And in December 1992, then
President George H. W. Bush issued
pardons that closed the legal
book if not the historical one.
As for the legacy of the affair, well,
you would be hard-pressed to argue
that it’s the worst crime committed
by a sitting American president.
Historians to this day disagree
on the extent of Ronald Reagan’s
involvement, or even the extent to
which he was aware of the details.
And even if he knew, there are
plenty of people who agree with the
intention: it did, after all, seem like
a neat solution to several problems.
“Neat” was indeed the adjective
North used to describe the idea.
But it was in clear violation of US law,
in terms of the financing of the Contras,
and in contradiction to stated US policy,
in terms of the sale of arms to Iran.
To its critics, and Reagan’s
critics, it was both illegal and
hypocritical, as well as corrosive to
constitutional checks and balances.
And did it work?
Well, the answer to that is
more clear-cut: it did not.
US-Iran relations are still frosty,
Iran is still designated as a
major sponsor of terrorist groups
in the region, Daniel Ortega, the
then-leader of the Sandinistas,
is still President of Nicaragua,
and for Hezbollah, taking hostages
hasn’t exactly gone out of fashion.
And as for the question of whether
subsequent US Presidents learned
any lessons from it, well, I’ll
let you be the judge of that.
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on the Iran-Contra scandal.
I know it was quite a complicated one,
with lots of moving parts and people
to keep track of, but I guess that’s
what happens when you conduct a game
of geopolitical chess, involving Swiss
bank accounts, American missiles, sworn
enemies and Central American guerrillas.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.